Title: 12 Questions to Ask Before Renting An Apartment
URL: https://offcampus.case.edu/resources/article/2175-12-questions-to-ask-before-renting-an-apartment

Summary: This article explores a variety of questions renters should ask before signing a lease, starting with the top 12 questions to ask followed by additional questions about renting. Let's get inquisitive!

In this article:
How Do I Pay Rent, and How Are Late Fees Assessed?
Under What Circumstances Will You Enter My Apartment Without Notice?
What Is the Community's Guest Policy?
Where Will I Park My Car?
How Far in Advance Do I Need to Give Notice Before Moving Out?
Can I Sublet the Apartment, and If Not, What Is the Penalty for Breaking My Lease?
Can I Make Changes to the Apartment and Will There Be Costs Involved?
Are There Plans to Make Any Updates to the Apartment Complex?
Are Any Utilities or Services Covered in the Cost of the Rent?
What Are My Options for Lease Renewal?
Under Which Circumstances Will My Security Deposit Not Be Refunded?
How Do You Handle Emergency Repairs?
Five Additional Questions to Consider
Frequently Asked Questions About Lease Agreements
You've done tons of searching online, toured numerous apartment complexes, and narrowed it down to a few top contenders. At this point in your apartment search, you’ve probably had all of your major questions answered: how much is rent, how long is the lease term, and what utilities are included? But there are other crucial questions to ask when renting an apartment than just the obvious ones.

Now is the time to get answers to some important questions before signing a lease agreement. After you provide your signature, it will be too late to take these things into consideration to ensure that you find the best place to live.

#1 HOW DO I PAY RENT, AND HOW ARE LATE FEES ASSESSED?
These days, nearly every complex has at least one electronic option for paying rent, but there may be a convenience fee from $1 - $5 for doing so. It may make sense to pay with a handwritten check delivered to the leasing office or mailed to the landlord. In that case, make sure you understand exactly when the grace period ends and the landlord imposes a late fee (e.g. five days after rent is due) and how much that fee is.
#2 UNDER WHAT CIRCUMSTANCES WILL YOU ENTER MY APARTMENT WITHOUT NOTICE?
You may not own the apartment, but that doesn't mean the community employees should be able to enter your home anytime they please. In most instances, the property manager should give you notice prior to entering your apartment, and legit complexes will be up front about what circumstances warrant them entering an apartment. You may also want to consider safety here. For example, does the landlord require background checks for those employees who have access to your apartment?
#3 WHAT IS THE COMMUNITY’S GUEST POLICY?
Having an out-of-town friend stay with you should be fine, but many communities have policies against guests staying longer than two weeks, or require that you notify the property manager if you’re going to have a long-term guest. The policy should be outlined in your lease, but make sure you know the rules so that you don’t violate your lease terms inadvertently.
#4 WHERE WILL I PARK MY CAR?
Questions like this are great to ask during an apartment tour. Does your rent include access to one or more parking spaces? Are they reserved, or in an open parking lot or parking garage? If parking isn’t provided, what are the alternatives? Street parking? Nearby garages? Be wary of being told street parking is easy to find. It could be tougher than advertised, so you should check it out for yourself.
#5 HOW FAR IN ADVANCE DO I NEED TO GIVE NOTICE BEFORE MOVING OUT?
In many instances, you’ll have to give notice 30-60 days in advance of moving out. If you don’t give the required notice, your lease could automatically renew or you could lose your security deposit.
#6 CAN I SUBLET THE APARTMENT, AND IF NOT, WHAT IS THE PENALTY FOR BREAKING MY LEASE?
You never know when your job or personal life could require you to move on short notice. In the event that you need to move out before your lease is up, it’s good to know your options. Some apartment communities are against subletting, and it could be a serious breach of contract. Make sure you can afford penalties for breaking your lease because you never know what could happen. 
#7 CAN I MAKE CHANGES TO THE APARTMENT AND WILL THERE BE COSTS INVOLVED?
Putting your own personal touch on an apartment can end up costing you at some complexes, while others don’t mind as long as you put things back the way they were when you moved into the property.
#8 ARE THERE PLANS TO MAKE ANY UPDATES TO THE APARTMENT COMPLEX?
This is important for two reasons: 1) If improvements are being made then you may have to deal with construction. 2) Updates could add to the amenities, enjoyment, and appeal of your apartment.
#9 ARE ANY UTILITIES OR SERVICES COVERED IN THE COST OF THE RENT? FOR THOSE THAT AREN’T, HOW ARE UTILITY COSTS CALCULATED?
When budgeting for an apartment, knowing what rent covers is important in determining the overall costs and affordability. For utilities not included in rent, each unit may be metered separately. But if it isn’t, you’ll want to know how your monthly rate is calculated. Whether you’ll have gas appliances can also come into play.
#10 WHAT ARE MY OPTIONS FOR LEASE RENEWAL?
Perhaps the landlord plans to renovate in a year’s time, so renewing isn’t an option. Or maybe in a year’s time you’ll decide to move, but what if your new lease agreement doesn’t begin until two months after your current lease expires? Is a short-term or a month-to-month lease an option?
#11 UNDER WHICH CIRCUMSTANCES WILL MY SECURITY DEPOSIT NOT BE REFUNDED?
Not cleaning the apartment sufficiently could be enough for the property manager to withhold a portion of your security deposit. A good rule of thumb is that with the exception of normal wear and tear, the apartment should be left the way it was when you moved in if you want to get the full deposit back.
#12 HOW DO YOU HANDLE EMERGENCY REPAIRS?
No one wants to deal with a burst pipe at midnight on a Tuesday, but it’s a repair that has to be handled ASAP. Before choosing an apartment, it’s important to know how all kinds of repairs are handled, particularly the emergencies.

FIVE ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
While the 12 questions above apply to most renters, these additional five questions are a bit more specific. Figure out which questions pertain to your situation, and pair all or a few of these bonus questions with the ones above to make sure you have everything you need to know before you sign a lease agreement. 
#1 Does this apartment have any pest problems?
If you’re potentially renting in an older building, in an apartment building near a body of water, or in a pet-friendly apartment building, it’s a good idea to ask about pest issues. Ask your landlord if rodents, bed bugs, fleas, roaches, etc. have ever been a problem in the complex and what pest preventive methods are used. 
Pest control should be covered by your rent. Your apartment building should either automatically treat for pests each month or have an option for you to schedule pest control each month. 
#2 Is rental insurance required? 
Whether it’s required or not, every renter should have renters insurance because it protects you from events out of your control. That being said, you may still want to ask your landlord if it’s required in the lease and make sure that your renters insurance plan is in compliance with the lease.
#3 Are the locks changed between tenants, and who has access to the keys?
Locks and keys should always be changed between tenants. If the landlord can’t tell you for sure that the locks were changed, be wary of the property. If it’s confirmed that locks are changed between residents, follow up by asking about the keys to your unit. Your landlord should give you a key and maybe a spare key. Then, there should be an extra key in a secure location that only your landlord has access to for emergencies and maintenance requests. In addition to these keys, there may also be a master key in a secured location. If there are any additional keys, or there is no secure location or process for obtaining the extra or master key from the landlord, the property might not have safety as a top priority. 
#4 What is the average cost of monthly utilities?
This is an important question to ask if you’re a first time renter, moving to a different city, or moving to a different size rental. Utility costs vary by location and usage. If you’re moving to a big city or a larger apartment, be prepared for higher utility costs. The landlord will be able to tell you an estimated price, but it’s also important to inquire about how you pay for utilities and what services you’ll need. Make sure that you are including that when you calculate your rental budget. Some communities lump utilities in with rent. Some require you to take care of utilities on your own, and others may be somewhere in the middle. For example, you may be responsible for paying water and electricity, but pest control and trash are lumped into a service fees category in your monthly rent. Ask the landlord to break down all the utility costs for you.
#5 What is the pet policy?
If you have a furry (or not so furry) friend, ask about the pet policy. Inquire about any fees associated with having a pet, including pet rent, pet deposits, and/or pet fees, as well as restrictions pertaining to breeds, species, and number of pets allowed. 
There’s a lot of ground to cover before you sign a lease, and plenty of important questions to ask when looking for a new apartment. If you want to protect yourself and prevent a mess of misunderstandings once you move in, it’s crucial to ask the right questions during your apartment hunt. Covering all of your bases should mean less headaches in the long run.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT LEASE AGREEMENTS
How do I prepare for an apartment tour?
To prepare for an apartment tour, write down the questions above plus any other important questions you may have. Ask these questions during your apartment tour. Take notes of all the important information and ask the person leading the tour if you are allowed to take pictures. If there are some questions the touring agent can’t answer, ask the property manager or landlord after your tour is over.
Who can answer my questions about renting?
A leasing agent, property manager, or landlord should be able to answer your questions. Leasing agents are likely employed by the landlord or management company, so if it’s a manager-specific question, wait until you hear from either the landlord or property manager before you sign the lease agreement.
Should I get answers to my questions in writing?
To keep a record, consider emailing questions to your potential landlord. This way you’ll have a record of their answers in case you find a discrepancy. Even if you get your questions answered in person during your apartment tour, still follow up with an email. The leasing agent or landlord can respond with a summary of their answers.