Title: ROOMMATE CONSIDERATIONS
URL: https://offcampus.case.edu/resources/article/1270-roommates-things-to-consider

Who will you live with? Who you live with may be even more important than where you live, so it’s a good idea to think through the decision of whether to have roommates and who your roommates will be. While your best friend might seem like an obvious choice, be sure that you have considered the challenges that living in close quarters will bring. Living together can sometimes strain friendships, especially if you disagree about cleanliness, parties, guests, paying bills, or expectations of each other.

QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF AS YOU CONSIDER LOOKING FOR A ROOMMATE(S):

Age

Are you looking for roommates who are the same age as you?

Number

How many people could you realistically share your home with?

How many people do you think you can comfortably live with in the space you are looking at?

Lifestyle

What kind of lifestyle do you plan to lead in your new home?

What are your study habits?

What is your attitude toward overnight guests, parties, etc.?

Could conflicts occur because of roommates’ different schedules, diets, pets, smoking, drinking, or other personal/social habits?

Rent

What are you willing to pay as your share of the rent?

How are you willing to divide the rent cost evenly, or adjusted according to room size/amenities, belongings, pets, etc.?

Length of Time

How long are you planning to live in this home?

How long are you planning to live with the same roommates?

Chores

Will there be designated chores/responsibilities for upkeep of the home?

How concerned are you about your potential roommate(s) cleanliness and maintenance habits?

Sharing

Would you rather buy food and household supplies separately or together?

What is your policy for sharing items in common areas, such as electronics or living room/dining room furniture?

What are you willing to contribute towards furnishing the home, such as appliances, furniture, etc.?

Pets

Do you currently have, or would you like to have, a pet?

Would you share responsibility for its care?

How many pets would you be comfortable having in the space?

Privacy

How will you determine/establish boundaries with your roommates, your space, and your time?

Roommate Relationship Expectations

Will you want your roommate to share just the financial responsibility and space?

Or, will you want your roommate to be part of your social life?

Are you okay with personal property being left in common areas?

Responsibilities

Are you willing to put your name on the utility bills, lease, security deposit?

Are you willing to have a roommate’s name on the utility bills, lease, security deposit?

Parking

How important is having your own parking space?

How many parking spaces are available compared to how many potential roommates have cars?

QUESTIONS TO ASK YOUR POTENTIAL ROOMMATES AS YOU DISCUSS SHARING A PLACE TO LIVE:

Household/Personal Security

Do you lock the doors while at home?

How concerned would you be if you have not heard from your roommate in over 48 hours?

Cleaning/Maintenance

How important is a clean household to you?

How frequently would you expect your roommate to participate in household cleaning?

Sharing

Are you okay with roommates borrowing your belongings or would you prefer they did not?

Do you plan to share any household consumables or keep everything separate?

Privacy/Relationship Expectations

Are you OK with your roommate walking around in his/her underwear?

What type of relationship are you looking for with your new roommate?

Are you looking for someone to hang out with or someone to just share the bills?

Lifestyle/Personal Habits

Are political or religious outlooks important to you?

What are your expectations of household noise?

Are you a night owl or an early bird?

Is smoking/vaping an issue? Are certain areas off limits or designated for smoking?

What are your views on consumption of alcohol and/or other substances?

Guests/Visitors

Do you have any friends and/or family members, local or out of town, who will be stopping by/staying over? How frequently and for what length of time?

Do you have a “significant other,” local or out of town, who will be stopping by/staying over? How frequently and for what length of time?