Starting Your Search

Searching for Housing
Use the Housing Finder to filter by bedrooms, price, neighborhood, and more. 

Always tour the property if possible before signing a lease. If you aren't in the area, ask if the landlord provides virtual tours. 
Look out for scams. If it seems too good to be true, it probably is.

HOUSING SEARCH CHECKLIST

Use this checklist to help evaluate each property that you view and take photos to record what you see. This way, you will be able to review your options when you are home and not under pressure. This will also help you to compare the pros and cons of each apartment.

PROPERTY ADDRESS:
NOTES/COMMENTS:

Location

How close/easy is it to get to campus from the property?

Is there easy access to necessary conveniences (grocery store, shops, parking, etc.)?

Layout (Is the space adequate for your needs?)

Bathrooms (number, size, shower/tub/closet?)

Bedrooms (number, size, layout?)

Closets (number, location, size?)

Is there storage space? (location and size)

Laundry Facilities (location, cost?)

Kitchen Appliances (what is provided?)

Parking (Is there ample parking? Are parking spaces reserved? Is a permit required? If there is on-street parking, are there plenty of spaces available throughout the day? Is a city permit required to park on the street?)

Pets (Are they allowed? Any restrictions? Is the property/unit pet-friendly?)

Condition

What is the condition of the carpet and/or flooring?

Does the thermostat work properly? (Test both heating and air conditioning.)

Do all faucets work properly? (Check the hot and cold settings.)

Do all light fixtures work properly?

Cost & Lease Information

How much is the monthly rent?

Are any utilities included in the rent? What is the average cost of the utilities not included in the rent?

What are the required move-in/move-out fees and deposits?

Are sublets allowed and, if so, is there a fee?

When does the lease begin and end?

What are the fees associated with terminating the lease early?

When do you have to give notice to renew or move out?

Safety & Security

Do the windows lock/unlock properly? Do the windows have screens?

Do exterior doors lock/unlock properly? Do bedroom doors have privacy locks on the inside? (This is a possible consideration if you are living with roommates.)

Is there a smoke detector on each floor? Do all smoke detectors function properly? Who is responsible for changing batteries in the detectors?

Do all doors (interior & exterior) completely close and lock?

Is the exterior well-lit? Is shrubbery appropriately trimmed?

What is the feedback from current/previous tenants? (if available)

Other Notable Property/Unit Features