Title: Getting Around
URL: https://case.edu/studentlife/graduate/resources/getting-around

There are many ways to get to and around CWRU's campus. From university shuttles, a car, the public transit system, or your own two feet there is no shortage of options. 

Parking
Parking on campus is a convenient option for many students. Permit types and the fee structure are determined by Access Services. Students can purchase a parking pass for campus lots at Access Services in Crawford Hall.

Walking Escorts
Campus Safety has a 24/7 service that will walk you to your car, other campus destinations, and the University Circle area. It's always safer to walk in groups or with another person. To request a walking escort, call 216.368.3300 any time of day or night, for any reason.

Safe Ride
Safe Ride is a free service that runs daily from 6 pm to 3 am. It picks up students and drops them off at their destination in the designated service area. Safe Rides can be reserved by phone, on the website or through the “CWRU Safe Ride” app. 

Shuttles and Routes
The University in partnership with other area institutions has ten shuttles that run various routes around campus and nearby neighborhoods. Not only are there routes that go around campus, but also to Target, Walmart, and the HEC campus. See the maps for more details and to find the best route for you! Route stops are marked with signs on campus. Shuttles have set operating times and reach stops on average of every 15 to 20 minutes. You can access a map, detailing the shuttle route schedules with their times. 

You can use the shuttle tracker app, Transloc, to see time estimates and shuttles running for each route. 

Biking and Scooters 
Many students ride their bike to and around campus. Make sure to register your bike with the CWRU police. There are 140+ bike racks around campus and you can utilize Google Maps in the bike mode in order to navigate around campus. Consider joining the CWRU Cycling Team via Campus Groups for a biking community! 

Consider renting scooters to get quickly around campus. This article contains safety tips and guidelines while using these scooters in the nearby Cleveland area.